Rwy'n debyg ymlaen.
Helo, fy enw i yw Debbie Jones a gyda fi heddiw yw…
Rhian Evans.
Rhian Evans, yw'r rhai. Ydw i heddiw ym Mundei 17 mei.
Rhy i a dwi yw'n siarad yn ystod a chattwyd am ymddiriedig y mae Rhian yn ymwneud yn.
Yn ystod ymddiriedig, pan oedd hi'n mynd i Mencap yn ystod.
Ie.
Yn ystod ymddiriedig, dydyn ni ddim yn y bwyd yma, ydyn ni?
Ydyn ni'n mynd i Mencap?
Roedd hi'n ystod yn ystod, ydyn ni?
Mae'n dda iawn.
Ydyn ni.
Yr ystod y bwyd yma?
Yr ystod y bwyd yn ystod?
Ie.
Dydyn ni ddim yn y bwyd yma, ydyn ni?
Dydyn ni'n gael y gweithdoriaeth?
Ie.
Yr ystod y bwyd yn ystod?
Rwy'n gwybod, iawn.
Ie.
A dydyn ni'n mynd i ddod i ddod i ddod yn ystod?
Beth oedd y ddod hwn?
A oedd yn ymddygiad?
Ie.
Roedd yn ymddygiad?
Ychydig?
Roedd yn ddod o'r weithdoriaeth?
Ie.
Arfer.
A dyna chi'n rhan o grŵp o lythiadau gydag 2CAM.
2CAM, ie.
Roeddwn yn ymddygiad.
Ie.
Roedd yn dda.
Felly, beth oedd yn y 2CAM?
Rydyn ni'n gael ymddygiad a pha?
Felly, gydyn ni'n gael ymddygiad ac a pha?
Ie.
Felly, beth oedd yn helpu i chi yn y 2CAM?
Gwleidydd.
Rwy'n gwybod.
a beth o bobl wedi'i gyrraedd?
Fi, Deanne, Sonya,
ac mae o bobl hefyd.
A chi, fel grwp,
ydych chi'n dod i'r ddod, yw hynny,
ac ydych chi wedi'i ddechrau i gampain i beth.
Dyna'n deall.
Felly, rydych chi hefyd wedi'i gyrraedd a gweithio mewn cyfan?
Ie, rydw i.
Felly, oedd yn gwybod y gallwch chi gweithio mewn Clambeftlen
pan oeddwch chi'n gweithio?
Yn.
Roeddwch chi'n gweithio un dydd a chyd?
Ie.
Oedd yna?
Roeddwch chi'n gweithio i'n gweithio?
Gweithio.
A hoffo?
Lleua.
Oedd yna?
Gwgig.
Llewyn teg?
Ie.
Roeddwch chi'n gweithio ar gyfer y ddod yn ystod?
Ie, a'r ffordd a'r ffordd hefyd.
A'r ffordd a'r ffordd hefyd.
Felly, y gampain y byddwch chi a'ch ffrindiau wedi'i gyrraedd yn ystod pan oeddwch chi yn Mencap…
Ie.
…oedd am…
Gampain.
Roedd y gampain i'w gwneud y?
Roedd pobl yn saf.
Ie.
Felly, beth wnaethon nhw gydweithio?
Ym…
Mae'r llai yn oed pobl.
Roeddwch chi eisiau y llai yn y ddod i'r pobl.
Ie.
Gallwch chi gilyddio beth yw hynny?
Lleun.
Mae'n rhaid.
Ie.
Mae'n cael y tro cyllid, yw e'n dda, a oedd yn dda.
Yn oed yn gysylltu.
Ie.
Beth wnaethon ni wneud i wneud hynny'n cymryd?
Campain.
Roeddwch chi'n campain.
Ie.
A beth oedd hynny'n dechrau?
Beth oedd hynny'n dechrau?
Cymryd o bobl fel Roedd.
Ie.
A allan.
Felly, a oedd pobl ydych chi'n ddweud amdano amdano?
Nic Bates.
A allan.
Beth oedd hynny?
Beth oedd Nic?
Er…
Nic Bates.
Beth oedd hynny?
A allan.
Beth oedd Nic?
Er…
Can you remember?
Blag.
Yn oed yn dda.
Don't worry, it's a long time ago.
Long time ago, yes.
It's a long time ago, Rhian.
So, did you speak to anybody in the town about how they felt?
Ie.
I read, Mayor.
You spoke to the Mayor.
Ie, that's what's dark it.
Oh my goodness.
Ie.
You spoke to the Mayor.
Can you remember what his name was?
Fw…
I'm Fwyrnydd.
Yeah, don't worry.
There's a Mayor every year, isn't there?
Yeah, definitely, yes.
So…
So you spoke to the Mayor.
Yes.
And did he agree with you?
Right.
Did you speak to other people in Clamberthlin?
The same, yeah.
Right.
What other people did you speak to?
There were people involved.
Did you speak to members of the public?
Yes.
And did you speak to anybody else?
Nick Bates.
Okay.
Did you…
Where did you find some children to speak to about it?
I found Nick Bates.
Yeah.
Where did you visit to find these children to talk to them about it?
With school.
The local schools?
Yeah.
Okay.
So, did it take a long time?
Long time, yes.
This campaign?
Yeah.
But it got done eventually?
They built the Pelican Crossing.
That's correct.
And where did they put it?
The newspaper.
No, where did they actually put the crossing?
Carpane.
Where did they build the crossing?
Watch Line.
Yeah.
Was it near the…
Near Carpane.
Was it… which building was it near?
I don't know.
Carpane.
Which building?
Big Brother, yes.
Was it near the school?
Near the school, yes.
And the library?
The library, yes.
Okay.
And did it make it easier?
Made it easier for me, yes.
Made it easier for you because you're very independent.
I am.
Yeah.
So, what did you think when you saw this newspaper cut in?
Really good.
Yeah, were you proud?
I'm very pleased.
So, it says here, Reanne thought of it because she worked at an old people's home.
So, that was…
Care of people.
Yeah, that was clue in tech.
Take.
Mm-hm.
And were some of the old people finding it difficult to go to school?
Yes.
No, I…
So, did you help them?
Yes, I have.
Okay.
So, who helped you a lot during this campaign?
Diane.
She was…
Yeah.
Who was Diane?
Diane was link worker.
She was your link worker.
As well.
Okay.
Can you remember how long ago this was?
Long time.
It was a long time.
Yeah.
How long have you been coming to Lancashire?
Loaded.
Loaded?
Yeah.
Okay.
So, what other things did you used to do?
Woodwork.
You used to do woodwork?
Artcraft, painting, anything.
What's your favourite thing?
Anything.
Mosaics.
You like doing mosaics?
Yeah.
So, we're going to do some more of those, aren't we?
Okay.
And we haven't… you haven't been back to Mencap for a long time?
A long time, yes.
Why is that?
Here.
Why haven't we been open?
Shut.
Why have we been shut?
What's been happening in the world?
That we couldn't open.
Not at all.
Yeah, what's happened?
Why have we got to wear masks?
Germs.
So, we've been shut, haven't we, because of Covid?
Yes.
Covid pandemic.
Yeah.
And you can't wait to get back properly.
Yeah, I agree.
So, what things did we used to do?
Yes, wash the house.
We did, before we shut down, we had to wash a house a lot, didn't we?
As well.
But I'm thinking about Mencap now.
Yes.
What sort of things were we doing before we had to close?
We were… what did we used to do on a Monday?
Can you remember?
I love cooking with Rose.
We like cooking with Rose.
Yes.
And do you… what do we… we've got anything at anywhere else we work.
We've got the workshop.
Hub.
We've got the hub.
Where else do we…
Cooking here.
We do cooking here.
Yeah.
Where do we grow vegetables?
Carrots, vegetables, anything.
Where do we grow them, Rhian?
Rose gives me confidence.
She does give you confidence.
Yes.
You like working with Rosie.
Yeah.
So, what did we used to do on Tuesdays?
I cleaned the rubbish.
Did we used to walk up to the allotment?
Yeah.
And what were we doing on Tuesdays?
We were doing the wash.
Did we used to walk up to the allotment?
Yeah, garden, yeah.
Yeah, so that's where we grew the…
Flowers, vegetables.
That's right, yeah.
So, we had the allotment.
Yeah.
We had the workshop.
We… well, we still got them and we still got the hub.
Yes.
What other things do we do in the community?
What did you use to enjoy doing?
We used to…
Which work?
We used to go and take things to people, didn't you, Juliet?
Yes.
Do you remember what that was called?
Wheels on Wheels.
Meals on Wheels, you used to do that.
That's right.
And what else do we do on a Thursday?
We make things in the workshop.
Yeah, markets.
Yeah.
And we use to do a little bit of a…
You know, we used to go and do a little bit of a…
There's a little bit of a…
Yeah.
We make things in the workshop.
Yeah, markets.
Yes, we go to the market.
As well.
Which bit is your favourite?
What thing is your favourite thing that we do?
The stall.
You like the stall?
Yes.
And what things did we make for our Christmas stall?
Table.
Yeah.
And what things did we sell for Christmas?
Can you remember?
That's me.
You put… well, we had little trees, didn't we?
Yeah.
And we made wooden…
Spoon.
What does Santa… what Paul Santa's sleigh?
Erm…
Nick made one.
Yeah.
Reindeer, can you remember?
Oh, yes, I remember, yes.
Yeah.
So are you looking forward to coming back?
I can't wait.
You can't wait, that's good.
Is there anything else you would like to say about your… the Pelican crossing?
Yes.
Is there anything else you want to say?
Really good.
It's really good.
It actually took a long, long time to get this done, didn't it?
Yeah.
And they came and did a census…
Yes.
…of the transport people.
Yep.
And they said that there wasn't enough traffic…
No.
…initially to warrant a Pelican crossing.
I agree.
And then they came again.
Then?
And your campaign eventually made them put three pedestrian crossings down.
That was a start, yes.
Yeah.
And can you remember where the other… so there's one up by the high school now because of you…
Yes.
…and the work you did.
Can you remember what town the other two pedestrian crossings…
Talachyn.
There's one in Talachyn and there are two in…
Clansanfryd.
Yes.
Yeah.
So there are two there and one in Talachyn.
And your campaign…
Yes.
…helped people…
How?
Care for people.
Yeah.
You were caring about people.
It was fun.
So what can people do now safely?
They can…
Get a seat in a joint.
They can cross the roads.
Yeah.
Yeah, I agree.
You've done very well.
You're going to say goodbye.
Yes.
Goodbye.
Bye.